半导体物理与晶体生长
日期: 2026年9月17日 18:30
语言: 英语 → 中文
时长: 50分23秒

To just come in and let a bit of.
就进来，让一点……

Intensity. Yeah, I prepared quite a lot of slides for you, but don't worry, so many of these contents actually are just for your reference, and so the key portion actually I will still just try to bring you the rest of it.
强度。对，我给你们准备了相当多的幻灯片，不过别担心，这些内容其实大部分仅供你们参考。至于关键部分，我仍然会尽量把剩下的内容都带到这里来。

So don't worry about it. And in the end of today's class, we will take a 10-minute quiz, and now I already prepared the exam papers for you guys, and but the quiz should be too difficult, yeah, so don't worry about it. So, but still, I hope that you will be quite focused in this whole lesson.
所以别担心。在今天课程的最后，我们会进行一次10分钟的测验，现在我已经为你们准备好了试卷，但测验应该不会太难，所以别担心。所以，但我还是希望你们能在整节课中保持专注。

Because all these quiz will just be covered in my lecture, so you can find out the answers on all lecture notes but don't really just, just, just open your lecture notes to really refer to, to search for answers. It's a closed book and closed notes practice, yeah.
因为这些测验内容都会在我的讲课中覆盖，所以你们可以在所有讲义里找到答案，但别真的就、就、就打开讲义去查阅、去找答案。闭卷且不能看笔记的练习，是的。

So try to really focus good, and so I will try to probably take one or two breaks and depends on our situation because we this content actually is quite heavy so I will try to really just reserve enough time for you for the exam.
所以尽量好好集中注意力，我可能会安排一两次休息，具体看情况，因为这部分内容实际上挺多的，我会尽量留足时间给你们考试。

So the firstly, what I the second topic and so this is a very difficult problem try to really precisely define so the relativity actually is really that goes very wide range yeah like 10 to the minus 2 to 10 to the 9 yeah ohm centimeter so usually ohm centimeter actually is used actually in example not industry to illustrate this conductivity or relativity and also it can be modified very dramatically by impurities of events and the energy gap usually lying just from 0 to 4 actually 0 actually is not central that one yeah but slightly greater than 0 actually they are central very narrow back ends and then they are central back ends then for insulators and so so they are just at a 0 0 temperature actually 0 K actually they are we have an insulator and then the conductivity actually is just increased with temperature and at a low temperature. When you increase temperature you will see the conductivity decrease right but some conductors are different so why some conductor is different and this this actually is a very interesting quantum mechanical phenomenon yeah so many of these electrons in the valence band of the sample conductors they are getting excited by the temperature and then they actually provide you some conductivities yeah so this is a different very different from metal but for metal because you already have quite a lot of free electrons then when they really just collide with your lattice or with your defense then then they actually just you lose some conductivities so when temperature increases this kind of collision actually also increases therefore you you just lose some of this conductivities when temperature increases and.
那么首先，关于第二个主题，这是一个非常困难的问题，试图真正精确地定义。所以电阻率实际上涵盖的范围非常广，从10的负2次方到10的9次方欧姆厘米。通常欧姆厘米实际上是在例子中使用，而不是在工业中，用来说明电导率或电阻率。而且它可以通过杂质和缺陷非常显著地改变，能隙通常只位于0到4之间，实际上0并不是中心值，嗯，只是略大于0，实际上它们是极窄的带隙，然后这些是窄带隙，而对于绝缘体来说，所以在0温度下，实际上在0K时，我们有一个绝缘体，然后电导率实际上只是随着温度增加而增加，并且在低温下。当温度升高时，你会看到电导率下降，对吧，但有些导体不一样，所以为什么有些导体不一样，这实际上是一个非常有趣的量子力学现象，嗯，所以这些在样品导体价带中的许多电子，它们被温度激发，然后它们实际上为你提供了一些电导率，嗯，所以这与金属非常不同，但对金属来说，因为你已经有相当多的自由电子，然后当它们真的与你的晶格或你的缺陷碰撞时，然后它们实际上就损失了一些电导率，所以当温度升高时，这种碰撞实际上也会增加，因此当温度升高时，你就损失了一些电导率。

And also different another different thing from between.
另外还有一个不同的区别。

These two material actually just that you can double sample conductors the different materials you do also give you very different carrier.
实际上这两种材料，你可以双样本导体，不同材料也会给你非常不同的载流子。

Types yeah so so for example like you can just do electrons to the conduction band and and also do holes in the valence band and when you do electrons to the conduction band actually you form so-called n-type and then when you do holes to the valence band you form p-type conductors so those are just some of these fundamental reviews I expect that most of you already heard about it right or learned some very basic knowledge of it but we will just go very just deeply beyond this this point yeah so we have a lot of things to cover today and these three guys yeah.
对，所以比如说，你可以把电子激发到导带，同时也可以把空穴激发到价带。当你把电子激发到导带时，实际上就形成了所谓的n型，然后当你把空穴激发到价带时，就形成了p型导体。这些只是基础概念中的一部分，我估计你们大多数人已经听说过或者学过一些基本知识了，但我们会在此基础上深入探讨更多。今天有很多内容要讲，还有这三位。

The three of the most famous guys yeah the big three actually yeah and who invented the transistor yeah so you can see the transistor this is the first transistor ever they built in in the lab yeah in the Bell lab actually so you can see this is a lot ugly right it's very ugly yeah
这三个最著名的人物，是的，就是三大巨头，实际上，是的，还有谁发明了晶体管，是的，所以你可以看到晶体管，这是他们最早在实验室里制造出来的第一个晶体管，是的，实际上是在贝尔实验室，所以你可以看到这个东西很丑，对吧，非常丑，是的。

horrible actually I would say yeah yeah but usually actually when when you really invent something the first thing you produce is always this item yeah it's never just delicate just perfect right it's just yeah.
其实我会说挺难看的，是吧。但通常来说，当你真正发明一样东西时，第一个做出来的东西总是这样的，从来不会一开始就精致完美，对吧，就是这样。

Three guys do we want I want to really just mention so Shockley actually is a is is a the biggest guy yeah then later he also just quit the Bell lab and created a company try to really just make transistors and he also recruited quite a few the best talents yeah so he recruited actually eight eight eight eight people and those are just the most talented sample conductor physicists or scientists at a time and then unfortunately and Shockley actually is good at only actually recruitment he's horrible actually in management but all eight actually broke broke broke away from him and those people actually just they later they built new new companies and Shockley actually was very very happy yeah yeah.
三位大牛我们要特别提一下，肖克利其实是其中最厉害的一位，后来他也从贝尔实验室辞职了，创办了一家公司，想专门做晶体管，他还招了一批顶尖人才，招了八个人，这些是当时最优秀的半导体物理学家或科学家。但不幸的是，肖克利其实只擅长招人，管理方面却一塌糊涂，结果这八个人后来全都离开了他，他们后来各自组建了新的公司，而肖克利其实对此非常非常开心。

And then later actually he's a student and also student student really built a new company for the fire truck and later spin off Intel you heard about Intel right you probably few of you really heard about fire truck and those people really just becoming the just the pioneers in the modern industry and then Barling actually is on the left so these guys also very famous because this guy really win the well press twice one is for the transistor another time actually for the super conductive this is also crazy right because actually he was like an engineer in the Bell lab scientist at the Bell lab then later actually after he invented the transistor he also just didn't really get along very very well with the other two then he went to the university and also tried to really change his direction to something else which is a super conductivity yeah then you probably a few of you heard about Cooper's model or Cooper peer right so Cooper peer actually is with with price or. Actually was a major discoverer of this Cooper peer which actually leads to the modern super conductivity or super conductors yeah and then the other one actually is Bradley yeah this is just on the right yeah all right.
后来其实他的学生，也是学生学生真的创办了一家新公司，做那个消防车，后来分拆出了英特尔——你们听说过英特尔吧，可能你们当中没几个人真听说过消防车，而那些人后来真的就成了现代产业的先驱。然后巴丁其实在左边，这些人也非常有名，因为这个人真的拿了两次诺贝尔奖，一次是因为晶体管，另一次是因为超导，这也挺疯狂的，对吧，因为他其实在贝尔实验室就是个工程师、贝尔实验室的科学家，后来其实在他发明晶体管之后，他和另外两个人相处得不太融洽，于是他就去了大学，还试着把研究方向转到别的领域，就是超导。然后你们可能有些人听说过库珀模型或者库珀对，对吧，库珀对其实是和……实际上，他是库珀对的主要发现者之一，这导致了现代超导性或超导体的出现，然后另一位是布拉德利，就在右边，好的。

And then we have some kind of a very easy classifications of semiconductors and so if we if we just compare them by just elemental or or compound then we have elemental as a very famous like silicon germanium and so do you know what what material made of this silicon.
然后我们有一些非常简单的半导体分类，如果我们只是按元素或化合物来比较，那么元素半导体就有非常著名的像硅、锗，那你们知道这个硅是由什么材料制成的吗？

Silicon anybody think think it's not silicon raise your hand.
硅，有没有人觉得不是硅的，请举手。

Okay.
好，我们有一些非常简单的半导体分类，如果我们只是按元素或化合物来比较，那么元素半导体有非常著名的像硅、锗，那你们知道这是什么材料做的吗？就是这个硅。硅，有谁觉得不是硅的举手。

Truth is always in the hand of the minority and this should be germanium yeah and for a good reason actually yeah so so so so at the early time actually silicon is a melting temperature is very high so it's very difficult to process yeah so so they really build a germanium and later actually they they change to silicon yeah.
事实总是掌握在少数人手中，这应该是锗，而且实际上是有充分理由的。所以早期硅的熔点非常高，加工起来很困难，所以他们确实先用锗，后来才改用硅。

At least.
至少是这样。

Probably not this one but at least the first type of like pin junction is really made in in germanium yeah yeah so later actually when they have a good furnace actually they they try they improve their technique actually they they really just take silicon and then we also have the the the binaries binary compound or binary semiconductors gallium arsenide and gallium nitride zinc salinite and gallium salinite and etc and here actually the gallium nitride actually is another big.
大概不是这个，但至少第一类PN结确实是锗做的，是的。后来当他们有了好的炉子，实际上他们改进技术，就改用硅了。然后我们还有二元化合物或二元半导体，砷化镓和氮化镓、硒化锌和硒化镓等等，这里实际上氮化镓是另一个大的……

Start right because of gallium nitride also Indian gallium nitride so we will see all these sprints right the backlight your your cell from backlight and the lighting right from in this room the lighting probably not not this is a yeah but. Of. And also we may have a ternary compound so this binary right ternary compound as I said we have three components at the at the silver gallium sulfide or copper indium cellular right those are just a very interesting solar cell materials for photovoltaic materials and also we have a quaternary materials yeah like like this four components the other important semiconductors that we have oxides for example copper oxide right different types of copper oxide yeah so this is a lithium copper oxide and also European oxide magnetic semiconductors or magnet and also we have a so-called ferry electric materials as I show here and also we we we probably heard about like organic ones yeah so those are just the typical semiconductor you may just hear or hear hear about or just they are just they have some very important engineering applications but according to the climate gap then we can also define so-called derap and gap so the gallium arsenide and the indian arsenide gap derap and gap for indirect actually we have a germanium silicon and also aluminum arsenide and those indirect yeah so don't worry I won't really ask you like like in the quiz like this like whether germanium is a direct or indirect I won't really ask these questions yeah those are too tedious yeah yeah I don't really ask this and then for very narrow band gap we also have a mercury territe and also gallium arsenide and for wide band gap actually we have a gallium nitride yeah so gallium nitride really has a very big big band gap yeah so more than three electron loads yeah yeah.
对，因为氮化镓，还有氮化铟镓，所以我们会看到所有这些进展，对吧，背光，你的手机背光，还有照明，对吧，这个房间里的照明可能不是，不是这个，嗯，但。的。而且我们还可能有三元化合物，所以这个二元化合物，对吧，三元化合物，就像我说的，我们有三个组分，比如银镓硫化物或铜铟硒化物，对吧，那些都是非常有趣的太阳能电池材料，用于光伏材料，而且我们还有四元材料，是的，比如像这种四个组分的。其他重要的半导体，我们有氧化物，例如氧化铜，对吧，不同类型的氧化铜，是的，所以这是锂氧化铜，还有氧化铕磁性半导体，或者磁性材料，而且我们还有所谓的铁电材料，就像我在这里展示的，还有我们可能听说过有机材料，是的，所以那些就是典型的半导体，你可能听说过或听说过，或者它们只是有一些非常重要的工程应用。但根据能带隙，我们也可以定义所谓的直接带隙，所以砷化镓和砷化铟是直接带隙，对于间接带隙，实际上我们有锗、硅，还有砷化铝，那些是间接的，是的，所以别担心，我不会真的在测验里问你这种问题，比如锗是直接还是间接，我不会真问这些，是的，那些太繁琐了，是的，我真不问这个。然后对于非常窄的带隙，我们还有碲化汞，还有砷化镓，对于宽带隙，实际上我们有氮化镓，是的，所以氮化镓真的有非常大的带隙，是的，超过三个电子伏特，是的。

And then let's just take a look at the simplest and also most important semiconductor as we are reintroduced right we have a group four elements such as the silicon and germanium right and the the silicon germanium they form their most stable structure as a diamond structure yeah and of course diamond is also diamond structure yeah so I don't know how many of you already get get married but if you haven't already got married probably my advice is just that don't purchase diamond rings yeah also you probably know why right so really human can really fabricate a diamond very very in a very very good quality and also much cheaper yeah for the natural diamond then you probably may take a huge amount of effort to really distinguish like a natural diamond firm from from the man-made diamond yeah so don't don't don't buy don't buy diamond rings but gold is still nice yeah or platinum is also nice yeah.
那么，让我们来看一下最简单的，也是最重要的半导体，正如我们重新介绍的，我们有第四族元素，比如硅和锗，对吧，而硅和锗它们形成最稳定的结构是金刚石结构，对吧，当然，钻石也是金刚石结构，对吧，所以我不知道你们当中已经有多少人结婚了，但如果你们还没结婚，可能我的建议就是，别买钻石戒指，对吧，你们可能也知道为什么，对吧，所以人类真的可以制造出质量非常好、而且比天然钻石便宜得多的钻石，对吧，那你们可能要费很大劲才能区分天然钻石和人造钻石，对吧，所以别买，别买钻石戒指，但黄金还是不错的，对吧，或者铂金也挺好，对吧。

And then we also have like a so so so this one actually give you this not a unit cell this is not a premise this is a unit cell yeah so in this unit cell we can see actually for each each atom actually it has four neighbors right yeah so we have so this is so-called a tetrahedral kind of structure right yeah so this is a very symmetrical yeah and and so the lattice also itself actually we can consider as like two interpenetrating face center cubic so this one is face center cubic right it's it's a cubic it's a face center right so we have one set of face center cubic another set of face center cubic is a little bit tricky so we can see this guy this guy this guy and this guy they form another set of face center cubic yeah so you can see this one so diamond always have four neighbors right and then the basis of this two atoms actually they located at so so so for a smaller cell actually we have what we have this one actually is smallest possible unit right so in this smallest possible unit we see how many atoms do we have we have two atoms so one atom actually is like corner right so corner one and this guy if you take the transverse symmetry actually they are similar so they they are they are the same type but the center one actually is a different form right the center one actually that belongs to another face center cubic right this guy this guy this guy this guy so this guy is center one right but these four guys they are just yeah they are they are they are they are they are on the on the corner of the tetrahedral right yeah so that means actually for this very small cell we have two types of atoms right or we roughly speaking we have two atoms right one atom here one atom here those are just this guy's image right so these three actually are this guy's image yeah we don't worry what we want if we do a counting we only see this guy this guy right we have two atoms yeah.
然后我们还有像这样的，所以这个实际上给你的是一个不是晶胞，这个不是原胞，这是一个晶胞，对吧。所以在这个晶胞里，我们可以看到，实际上每个原子它都有四个邻居，对吧。所以我们有，这就是所谓的四面体结构，对吧。是的，这是一种非常对称的结构。而且，这个晶格本身实际上我们可以看作是两套相互穿插的面心立方。所以这个是一个面心立方，对吧。它是立方的，它是面心的，对吧。所以我们有一套面心立方，另一套面心立方有点棘手，所以我们可以看到这个、这个、这个和这个，它们形成了另一套面心立方，对吧。所以你可以看到这个，金刚石总是有四个邻居，对吧。然后这两个原子的基元，实际上它们位于……所以对于更小的晶胞，实际上我们有，我们有什么呢，这个实际上是最小的可能单元，对吧。所以在这个最小的可能单元里，我们看看有多少个原子，我们有两个原子。所以一个原子实际上是在角上的，对吧，角上的那个，而这个，如果你取平移对称性，实际上它们是相似的，所以它们是同一类型的。但中心的那个实际上是不同的形式，对吧。中心的那个实际上属于另一个面心立方，这个、这个、这个、这个，所以这个是中心那个，对吧。但这四个只不过是在四面体的角上，对吧。所以这意味着，实际上对于这个非常小的晶胞，我们有两种类型的原子，对吧。或者粗略地说，我们有两个原子，对吧。一个原子在这里，一个原子在这里，那些只是这个的镜像，对吧。所以这三个实际上是这个的镜像，对吧。我们不用管那个，如果我们做计数，我们只看这个和这个，我们有两个原子，对吧。

And also if you like you can also just just calculate like the half sphere fitting factor like like this thing right and this is much like a a compactly a.
而且如果你愿意的话，也可以直接计算一下这种半球的堆积因子，就像这个东西，对吧，这其实很像一种紧密堆积的。

Uh.
呃。

Packed so the fitting factor sorry less less less less compact packed packed yeah so this is as you see actually it's a bigger it's a fitting factor yeah so you already see from this figure right so we have four neighbors and for the cell right yeah for diamond we have four neighbors yeah.
所以你们可以看到，这个拟合因子更大，对吧。所以你们从这张图已经能看到，对于这个单元，我们有四个邻居，对吧，对于菱形，我们有四个邻居。

Yeah so as I mentioned these are just the three centers right.
对，正如我提到的，这只是三个中心，对吧。

And another type of element semiconductor is actually we replace this set of uh.
而另一种元素半导体呢，实际上我们替换了这一组……

This set of HDC with another atom and then we have what we have like gallium arsenide or gallium fluoride those things yeah so this one actually so-called zinc black but if we are color blind then we can already distinguish these two right so they are very similar all right.
好，所以这类HDC的原子换成另一种原子，然后就有了像砷化镓或氟化镓这类东西，对吧。所以这个实际上叫做闪锌矿，但如果我们不是色盲的话，就能区分这两者，对吧，它们非常相似。

Then then we also know that all semiconductors actually they cannot really you really conduct electrons right electricity they cannot really conduct so why because there is a band gap then where does this band gap come from so so we let's just just take the diamond as an example to see where do they come from so firstly actually in chemistry so there is a so-called hybridization yeah sp3 hybridization so what is sp hybridization so so so they have a s electrons and p electrons right yeah so this guy actually is an internal one so we don't care. Valence electrons so we have the valence of four right for for the for the carbon or for for silicon or right yeah then these two different.
然后我们还知道所有的半导体实际上并不能真正导电，对吧，不能真正导电。那为什么？因为有带隙。那这个带隙是从哪里来的呢？所以我们拿钻石作为例子来看看它是怎么来的。首先，在化学中，有一个所谓的杂化，就是sp3杂化。那什么是sp杂化呢？就是它们有s电子和p电子，对吧。这个其实是内部的，所以我们不管。价电子，所以我们有四个价电子，对吧，对于碳，或者对于硅，对吧，然后这两个是不同的。

Orbitals they may hybridize with each other yeah.
轨道它们可能会相互杂化。

Right they may hybridize with each other so this hybridized orbital right so this is a like p orbital this is a s orbital right so they may hybridize with each other and form four states so these four states they are just equal in energy yeah so this is a little bit about quantum mechanics but I don't really ask you all these details don't worry yeah as long as you know what is sp3 then that's good enough yeah so they they they they really just hybridize all together they will form these four states right but this one actually is only one atom what on corner right we have another atom in the center right so in the center we can also do the similar thing we have this s orbital and the p orbital they hybridize all together we form another four orbitals right so we call we call this guy actually is a site a and this guy is site b all right then we just linear combine all these orbitals all together right then totally how many electrons we have for this guy we know we have four valence electrons right this guy we also have four valence electrons so totally we have eight electrons right this eight electrons would eventually occupy the four states as shown here so those four states actually give you the sense of valence valence band so they are fully occupied then another four states are also created by quantum mechanics so those are called antibody states this are called bonding states all right so anti antibody state they are empty but the bonding state they are actually few so.
对，它们可能会彼此杂化，形成四个态，这四个态能量相等，这涉及一点量子力学，但我不要求你们掌握所有细节，别担心，只要知道什么是sp3就够了。它们确实全部杂化在一起，形成这四个态，但这只是位于角落的一个原子，我们中心还有另一个原子，所以中心我们也可以做类似的事情，有s轨道和p轨道，它们全部杂化，形成另外四个轨道，我们把这个称为A位点，那个称为B位点，然后我们把这些轨道全部线性组合起来，总共有多少个电子呢？我们知道这个有四个价电子，这个也有四个价电子，所以总共八个电子，这八个电子最终会占据这里显示的四个态，那四个态实际上给你们价带的概念，它们是完全被占据的，另外四个态也是由量子力学产生的，那些叫做反键态，这些叫做成键态，反键态是空的，而成键态实际上是满的。

This empty state and the and and the filled state they form what form a separation so.
这个空态和填充态它们形成了什么，形成了一个分离，所以。

This separation actually is one of the important origin or source for you to really see the band gap form in any semiconductors yeah so this bonding and antibonding separation but also be be be reminded that this is not the only reason yeah there are also more compact complexities there yeah so because this one you may argue that so if this is a semiconductor the hydrogen molecule is also semiconductor right you are hydrogen molecule also we have a bonding state and also antibody state so you should also be semiconductor but no this is not hydrogen molecule is not semiconductor they have to really form crystals if they form crystals they actually they also need to really fill the space with a certain geometry and also symmetry there right yeah so then that means actually all the bonds they will also quantum mechanically couple with each other kind of form more more compact structures then finally actually you will see what what is. Just try to really create anti-bands but only when they just couple with each other more and you finally see the band structure all right.
这种分离实际上是你们在半导体中看到能带隙形成的重要起源或来源之一，对吧，所以这种成键和反键的分离，但也要记住，这不是唯一的原因，对吧，还有更复杂的复杂性存在，对吧，因为这一点你们可能会争辩说，如果这是半导体，那么氢分子也是半导体，对吧，氢分子也有成键态和反键态，所以它也该是半导体，但不是，氢分子不是半导体，它们必须真正形成晶体，如果它们形成晶体，它们实际上也需要以一定的几何形状和对称性来填满空间，对吧，那么这意味着实际上所有的键也会在量子力学上相互耦合，形成更紧凑的结构，最终你们会看到什么是什么。所以尝试真正创建反键带，但只有当它们彼此耦合得更紧密时，你最终才会看到能带结构，对吧。

Yeah so this.
是的，所以这个……

One actually is just to give you a more uh clear picture of it right this is side a and side b but this time actually these two elements they are different right yeah so for example like we have a one metallic one and one non-metallic one right when they all together they also form bonding state events antibody state the antibody state eventually they couple all together they actually form conduction band and the bonding state they also couple all together and they then they form the valence band right then you can easily see why this is called valence band right because they come from the valence electrons so they call valence band conduction band also you can easily see why they are called called conduction band right because you excite some electrons to this this place right then they they are partially filled and they can conduct electricity so this is the general principle or general physical pictures of a semiconductor and why it has band gap and also why it may conduct electricity all right it's very simple yeah so don't worry so there is no quantum mechanics here right but actually there are a lot of quantum mechanics if you truly want to really learn how to really solve this quantum mechanically you should probably just take a degree in physics or take a my my my my semiconductor physics course which is way more difficult to do all right yeah so in the as I like let me start summarize so in the crystal the bonding and antibody states require dispersion and the exotope and which leads to the formation of a valence and the conduction electrons band with a gap as exotope gap and between the two manifolds of states right and what is k so k actually is so called a wave vectors yeah so you probably heard about in quantum mechanics we have duality right duality means like we have a like particle and a wave and right yeah so you can interpret this thing that particle as waves right therefore waves you already you use a vector to represent a wave right so that means actually in the wave space actually this one actually is a well well represented in so so for physicists actually we we can calculate easily so usually we we just do easy things right so we just calculate this energy as a function of wave vector instead of x or instead of r okay so for r actually this is a very nice all right so let's move on.
一个其实就是为了给你一个更清晰的图像，对吧，这是A面和B面，但这一次呢，实际上这两种元素它们是不一样的，对吧，比如说我们有一个金属性的和一个非金属性的，对吧，当它们结合在一起，它们也形成成键态和反键态，反键态最终它们全部耦合在一起，实际上就形成了导带，而成键态它们也全部耦合在一起，然后它们就形成了价带，对吧，然后你很容易看出为什么这叫价带，对吧，因为它们来自价电子，所以叫价带，导带呢，你也容易看出为什么叫导带，对吧，因为你可以把一些电子激发到这个位置，对吧，然后它们部分填充，它们就能导电，所以这就是半导体的一般原理或一般物理图像，以及为什么它有带隙，还有为什么它可能导电，好吧，这很简单，对吧，所以别担心，这里没有量子力学，对吧，但如果你真正想从量子力学角度去解它，其实里面有很多量子力学，你可能得拿个物理学学位，或者上我的半导体物理课程，那要难得多，好吧，所以在我总结一下，在晶体中，成键和反键态需要色散，而激子，这导致了价带和导带的形成，中间有带隙作为激子带隙，在这两个态流形之间，对吧，那么k是什么，k实际上就是所谓的波矢，对吧，你可能听说过量子力学里有波粒二象性，对吧，二象性就是说我们有粒子和波，对吧，所以你可以把这事解释成粒子作为波，对吧，因此波呢，你已经用矢量来表示一个波，对吧，所以这意味着在波空间里，这个实际上被很好地表示，所以对物理学家来说，我们其实能很容易计算，通常我们只做简单的事，对吧，所以我们就算能量作为波矢的函数，而不是x或r，好吧，对于r来说，这其实很漂亮，好吧，那我们继续。

And then there are also a little bit of quantum mechanics yeah so the optical properties near the band edge actually just largely decide what kind of photons can be absorbed yeah so for example like you have some kind of incoming photons right so with this uh.
然后还有一点量子力学的内容，所以靠近带边的光学性质实际上很大程度上决定了哪些光子能被吸收。比如你有一些入射的光子，那么用这个——

So this one actually give you the photon energy right so this c actually is a speed of light and and yeah so this one overall actually this is you will see this quantum quantum concept right yeah so you finally you have a photon energy so if photon energy is greater than your energy gap yeah then you you will see what you will see some kind of absorption of this photon right and then at the same time also electron is excited to the conduction band right so this is one thing okay.
那这个其实就是给你光子能量，对吧，所以这个 c 实际上是光速，然后，嗯，所以这个整体上其实就是你会看到这个量子的、量子的概念，对吧，嗯，所以最终你有一个光子能量，如果光子能量大于你的能隙，嗯，那你会看到，你会看到某种这个光子的吸收，对吧，同时电子也被激发到导带，对吧，这是一件事，好的。

Then for the direct band band gap that also means this k actually they are the same so this is called a direct band gap so this momentum actually they are the same yeah so you can also consider it as a momentum of electrons so they are the same so they call direct band gap and for indirect actually there there are the difference they call indirect band gap yeah so for direct band gap actually we can create some very good. Why because we do not really create any actual effects of heat but for indirect semiconductors we cannot really immediately just just just with photons yeah so we have to really just take it by some kind of relaxation vibration yeah so this actually is called photon in quantum mechanics and then gradually we will generate all heat right then previously if you still remember right I mentioned about silicon right silicon actually is an indirect semiconductor so that means actually the horrible materials for lighting device so in your lifetime it's very unlikely that you will see lighting device made of silicon right but garden nitride that's a direct gap so so that we may have a very good fabrications of a lighting.
那么对于直接带隙，这也意味着这个k实际上它们是相同的，所以这被称为直接带隙，所以这个动量实际上它们是相同的，是的，所以你也可以把它看作电子的动量，所以它们是相同的，所以他们称之为直接带隙，而对于间接带隙，实际上它们是有差异的，他们称之为间接带隙，是的，所以对于直接带隙，实际上我们可以制造出一些非常好的。因为实际上我们并没有真正产生任何热效应，但对于间接半导体，我们不能仅仅依靠光子就立即实现，所以我们必须通过某种弛豫振动来吸收，这在量子力学中被称为声子，然后逐渐地我们会产生热量。然后之前如果你还记得的话，我提到过硅，硅实际上是一种间接半导体，这意味着它其实是不适合做照明设备的材料，所以在你有生之年，你不太可能看到用硅制成的照明设备。但氮化镓是一种直接带隙半导体，所以这样我们就能很好地制造照明设备。

But silicon actually is very useful for other purposes for example for photovoltaic or for it.
但硅实际上对其他用途非常有用，例如用于光伏发电或用于它。

Right yeah
对，是的。

and so this one actually forget about it this is too too much detail forget about it.
这个嘛，算了，这个太细了，忽略它吧。

And this one is a little bit interesting so this is what I call band structure so this x is actually is a wave vector k right so this is a wave vector yeah yeah also you can also call it a momentum right this is the momentum space and this one actually in the energy space right so this zero point is very important this is so called a Fermi level yeah so anything below this Fermi level they are filled right so they are filled electrons anything above the Fermi level they are empty so they are conduction bands all right then you'll see this band gap right so did you see so this actually is a maximum point of the valence band right so we call the vbm with the shortcut then whereas the minimum point of the conduction band so anybody can tell me so.
这个有点意思，这就是我所说的能带结构，所以这个x实际上是波矢k，对吧，所以这是波矢，对，对，你也可以称之为动量，对，这是动量空间，而这个实际上是能量空间，对吧，所以这个零点非常重要，这就是所谓的费米能级，对，所以费米能级以下的任何东西都是被填充的，对吧，它们是被填充的电子，费米能级以上的任何东西都是空的，所以它们是导带，好了，然后你会看到这个带隙，对吧，你们看到了吧，所以这实际上是价带的最高点，对吧，我们简称VBM，而那是导带的最低点，所以有人能告诉我吗。

Here so.
所以这里呢，这个其实忽略掉，这个太细了，忽略掉。

No right it must be here right now.
不，它必须在这里，就是现在。

Exactly know what I what I'm talking about as an indirect semiconductor right so so so this this point and this point they they do not really overlap with each other right so if they are the same then then they call it direct semiconductor but they are if they are not same actually they call it indirect semiconductor all right yeah so this is a just a very unique features of a silicon right so single actually you don't have to worry about this details right yeah so those are details okay.
对，就是知道我在说什么。作为间接半导体，对吧，所以这个点和这个点它们并不真正重叠，对吧。如果它们是相同的，那就叫直接半导体；但如果它们不相同，实际上就叫间接半导体，对吧。好，所以这只是硅的一个非常独特的特性。其实你不用担心这些细节，对吧，好，那些都是细节。

Yeah so this one actually give you the sense of a direct and gap all right vbm and cbm so what's so good so this guy nitride I asked nitrogen yeah direct gap so nothing can be over. Then there's a table actually for some some semiconductors like there's a diamond silicon germanium they are all indirect right and then for for for this set of semiconductor they are direct I also list the the energy gaps for your references so you can see actually some actually have very narrow band gap right so this electron loads so if it's less than one electron load then there is very narrow right it's greater than 2.5 electron loads usually people think this is a very wide right yeah so for let's let's just look for for few very interesting guys right for example like this guy right garden garden garden frostbite the indirect it also has a pretty big band gap right yeah let's see this guy oh this is zinc oxide so it's a very wide wide band gap right but silicon is nice right so one point something right one point one something yeah all right so let's move on.
对，所以这个实际上让你理解直接带隙的概念，对吧，价带顶和导带底。那么好，这个氮化物，我问氮，对吧，直接带隙，所以没什么能超越它。此外，实际上有一张表格，列举了一些半导体，比如金刚石、硅、锗，它们都是间接半导体，而对于这类半导体，它们则是直接半导体。我还列出了能隙值供你们参考，所以你们可以看到，实际上有些半导体的能隙非常窄，对吧，所以这个电子伏特，如果小于一个电子伏特，那就非常窄，如果大于2.5个电子伏特，通常人们认为这是非常宽的能隙，是的，那么让我们看几个非常有趣的材料，比如这个，砷化镓，它是间接半导体，而且它的能隙也相当大，对吧，是的，再看这个，这是氧化锌，所以它是一个非常宽的能隙材料，但硅很不错，对吧，一点几，一点一几，好的，那么让我们继续。

So next let's just talk a little bit about how semiconductors are grown so those are very important very relevant to our direction.
那么接下来我们稍微谈谈半导体是如何生长的，这一点非常重要，也与我们的方向密切相关。

Right so when when when material scientists yeah so generally we have a different approaches for the crystal growth of semiconductors one actually just we can do the ball crystal and for melt yeah for melt actually this is their so-called electron porosity or bridgeman method yeah so this is for melt and also we can do this from solution or from a like a vapor phase right so those are just like we create a ball crystals but sometimes if you want to really grow very high quality semiconductors you do thin films right so thin thin films you have to really do it layer by layer so layer by layer type of growth so-called epitaxy yeah epitaxy just means we just do it layer by layer we grow one layer of atoms then another layer of atoms layer by layer right then we have this gas phase kind of approach right this gas phase approach so-called evaporation or like a CVD right chemical vapor deposition or OMVP actually they are the same thing vapor phase epitaxy so if you see VP or CVD then they are definitely equal yeah definitely the same thing and also we can just grow it by molecular molecular beams yeah so MBE this is so called yeah yeah this is important so try to really be careful yeah this is important yeah yeah so MBE is what MB actually is just you grow very slowly yeah you try to really just crack some some some stocks and just slowly just just just push them actually to the growth front and then they condense actually at the growth front at the growth very slowly and usually at a low temperature yeah so usually if you want to really achieve very good qualities of crystal usually you do MBE yeah but that's not the industrial approach in silicon industry so in the modern silicon industry it's actually people just take the very this some derivations of the electron porosity kind of approach and but much improved and also combine that with so-called ALD so atomic layer deposition and that one is very similar to this kind of a vapor phase deposition can be considered as a derivations of vapor phase deposition it's called ALD yeah that one actually is a largely just applied in this very famous companies like like TGB those companies yeah so if you really know how to really do ALD you definitely can get a very decent job in those kind of types yeah so this is a very very important and also in early times also people take the liquid phase epitaxy so kind of LPE so those are very important things yeah try to remember yeah so those are just I think many of you already heard about these terms right yeah so whenever you see some epitaxy actually that means actually so in in the recent like 20 years actually people are getting more and more interested in nanocrystal yeah so usually they are just grown by some precipitation and from solutions or glass melt etc yeah and also usually like people take the like a catalytic catalytic effects and for example you stone yeah and catalysis all right.
好，那么当材料科学家们……嗯，一般来说，对于半导体的晶体生长，我们有不同的方法。一种就是我们可以做体块晶体，对于熔体来说，嗯，这就是所谓的电子区熔法或者布里奇曼法，对吧，这是针对熔体的。另外我们也可以从溶液或者气相来做，对吧，这些就像是我们在制造体块晶体。但有时候，如果你想真正生长出高质量半导体，你会做薄膜，对吧？所以薄膜，你必须一层一层来做，这种逐层生长的方式就叫外延，嗯，外延就是指我们逐层来做，先长一层原子，再长一层原子，逐层进行，对吧。然后我们有这种气相的方法，对吧，这种气相方法叫做蒸发或者像CVD，化学气相沉积，或者OMVP，其实它们是同一回事，气相外延。所以如果你看到VPE或CVD，那它们绝对是一样的，嗯，肯定是同一回事。另外我们也可以用分子束来生长，嗯，MBE，这就是所谓的，是的，这个很重要，要真得小心，嗯，这个很重要。所以MBE是什么，MB其实就是你长得很慢，你试图去裂解一些源，然后慢慢地，就是慢慢地，把它们推到生长前沿，然后它们在生长前沿凝结，生长非常慢，通常是在低温下。所以通常如果你想得到非常好的晶体质量，你通常会做MBE，嗯，但那不是硅产业中的工业方法。在现代硅产业中，实际上人们就是采用电子区熔法的一些衍生方法，但改进很多，同时还结合了所谓的ALD，即原子层沉积，这个和那种气相沉积非常相似，可以看作是气相沉积的衍生方法，叫做ALD。嗯，那个实际上主要应用于那些非常著名的公司，比如像台积电那些公司，对吧。所以如果你真会做ALD，你肯定能在那类公司找到一份相当不错的工作。嗯，这是非常重要的。另外早期人们也采用液相外延，就是所谓的LPE。所以这些都是很重要的事情，试着记住。嗯，我觉得你们很多人可能已经听说过这些术语了，对吧。所以每当你看到某种外延，那实际上意味着……在最近这20年里，人们越来越关注纳米晶体，嗯，通常它们是通过溶液或玻璃熔体中的沉淀等来生长的，嗯，同时人们也会利用催化效应，比如……嗯，你刚才说的，还有催化。

So what's so good okay okay.
好，那我们接下来简单讲一下半导体是怎么生长的，这些对咱们的方向非常重要、非常相关。对，所以当材料科学家，嗯，一般来说我们有几种不同的方法来生长半导体晶体，一种实际上就是我们可以做球状晶体，而且对于熔体，对，对于熔体其实这就是所谓的电子孔隙法或者布里奇曼法，对，这是针对熔体的。

Then let me briefly introduce you what's really happening in this electron porosity yeah check porosity so this is a very interesting you will see what so this is a heater yeah so give you very high temperature and this one actually some kind of inner gas so inner gas is to really protect your center yeah and then you also have a a very very nice.
那我简单介绍一下这个电子孔隙率法里到底发生了什么。电子孔隙率法，这是一个非常有趣的，你会看到。这是一个加热器，给你提供非常高的温度，然后这个呢，实际上是一些惰性气体，惰性气体是用来保护你那个中心的，然后你还有一个非常非常好的。

Portions of this silicon oxide crystal yeah and then here actually you have this silicon melt yeah silicon melt actually is coming from what coming coming from silicon dioxide yeah so people really just put a lot of carbon into the silicon dioxide and they actually at high temperature they can get some kind of draft silicon so this rough silicon actually is not very pure usually the purity actually is about like 98% and then with that it as input they actually just put it in the crystal and then they will just try to really grow a more way more uh.
这部分氧化硅晶体，然后这里实际上是硅熔体，硅熔体其实是来自二氧化硅的，人们就是把大量碳放进二氧化硅里，在高温下能得到某种粗硅，这种粗硅其实纯度不高，通常纯度大概在98%左右，然后以此为原料，他们把它放进晶体里，然后尝试长出更，呃。

Nice and perfect crystal it's a usually coming from a seed so-called silicon seed and seed then this seed actually is just try to really attract the more and more silicon atoms in this silicon melt and they form a single crystal right.
漂亮且完美的晶体通常来自一个所谓的硅晶种，然后这个晶种实际上就是试图吸引硅熔体中越来越多的硅原子，它们形成单晶体，对吧。

And in this process people just gradually spin this something they rotate yeah they rotate this thing yeah okay.
在这个过程中，人们逐渐旋转这个东西，他们旋转这个玩意儿，是吧，好的。

And then when they rotate actually you see this this this single crystal gradually just grow bigger and bigger right yeah so this is just a little bit like when you just just just see like people making like a like cotton candy right cotton candy right spin it right so when it spin yeah.
然后当他们旋转的时候，实际上你会看到这个单晶逐渐变得越来越大，对吧。这有点像你看到人们做棉花糖那样，棉花糖，对吧，转它，对吧，所以当它转的时候，是的。

So spin actually is very useful yeah this is very important so generally.
所以旋转确实非常有用，是的，这非常重要，一般来说。

So the heat control actually is a horrible here right because you can see actually this heater is here right so you have some kind of inner gas protection and also you have a crystal right and then that means actually inside this silicon melt so the temperature field actually is not very homogeneous so.
所以热控制在这里其实很难办，对吧，因为你可以看到这个加热器在这，对吧，所以你有某种内部气体保护，而且你还有一个晶体，对吧，这意味着实际上在这个硅熔体内部，温度场其实不是很均匀，所以。

If it's not very homogeneous if you do not really spin it you will see what happening right.
如果不均匀的话，如果你不真的旋转它，你会看到会发生什么，对吧。

So a lot of defects a lot of cracks or a lot of misalignment of the atoms will will just occur on the surface right so those surface atom will eventually become bulk atoms the bulk means actually something inside right so that means you will create a huge number of defects or impurities there which is the right and once we spin it then the temperature field generally actually become more homogeneous right it's just like you you you you roast a chicken or duck right if you do not really spin it right so so you will see so so some some portion some surface probably already burned right other other portions still raw right so just spin it yeah but that spin actually for different purpose but this one also just yeah we want to really grow crystal but general idea is just that we want to really make this temperature field as homogeneous as possible right so this is a traditional approach so-called check porosity method and in the modern types nowadays actually people are also doing slightly different things yeah they actually no longer rotate it anymore but they have a very precise control of this crystal of this heater then they can just fine tune the temperature field very nicely and also automatically they can control it and then for a very long time usually like several weeks of this kind of a process then they can really make a huge crystal yeah so now the record actually for a lot of this kind of single crystal actually is unbelievable so if you check the literature actually it can be as heavy as more than one ton that's huge yeah and also not only silicon can be made this way other things can be also made this way yeah a lot of like like precious germs actually now can made in tints right so this crazy this is yeah so when I said said like don't don't purchase diamond rings and also don't really purchase other precious stone rings they can. Yeah so this is a yeah very very important yeah I think this is probably the most valuable lesson you learned today right yeah don't buy those things right and also try to really persuade your wife if you're the yeah you're a boy right so so so don't don't don't purchase those things right but but but platinum or gold and those still still nice yeah.
所以很多缺陷、很多裂纹或者很多原子的错位就会出现在表面，对吧，所以那些表面原子最终会变成体原子，体原子就是指内部的原子，所以那意味着你会产生大量的缺陷或杂质，对吧，而一旦我们旋转它，温度场通常就会变得均匀得多，对吧，就像你烤鸡或烤鸭一样，如果你不旋转它，对吧，你就会看到某些部分、某些表面可能已经烧焦了，而其他部分还是生的，所以就是旋转它，但那个旋转实际上是为了不同的目的，但这个也差不多是这样，我们确实想长出晶体，但总体思路就是我们想尽量让这个温度场尽可能均匀，对吧，所以这是传统的方法，所谓的“切克劳斯基法”，而在现代的类型中，现在人们也在做一些略有不同的事情，他们实际上不再旋转它了，但是他们有非常精确的控制，对晶体、对加热器的控制，然后他们就能非常精细地调节温度场，而且还能自动控制，并且持续很长时间，通常这种过程要持续几周，然后他们就能真正长出巨大的晶体，所以现在对于很多这种单晶的记录实际上是非常惊人的，如果你查文献的话，实际上可以重达超过一吨，那真是巨大，对吧，而且不仅仅是硅可以这样制造，其他东西也可以这样做，很多像珍贵的宝石，现在实际上可以批量生产，这真是疯狂，对吧，所以当我说不要买钻石戒指，也不要买其他宝石戒指时，它们可能是人造的。对，所以这个真的很重要。我觉得这可能是你今天学到的最有价值的一课，对吧。别买那些东西，而且如果你是个男生的话，要努力说服你的妻子，所以别买那些东西。不过铂金或黄金那些还是不错的。

All right then let's just talk a little bit about epitaxy growth.
好，那接下来我们稍微聊聊外延生长。

So for epitaxial growth we have a two-dimensional growth like actually layers like adhere to substrate and more more than to each other actually it's called a 2D growth yeah so we have this so usually called layer by layer growth another approach actually so-called a 3D growth or island growth yeah so there's usually there's a name here so-called mermer wagamo so you so actually layers actually they do not really just like to adhere to the substrate yeah so that means actually you form islands here instead of just a very flat plate you form islands yeah so they're very very easy to understand and sometimes actually you firstly form layers you have 2D growth then later you can already sustain this 2D growth and you you it becomes three-dimensional growth this so-called strong strong skin and crus tendons mode so this usually we call sk mode yeah this sk mode actually is produced by stress because usually you have a substrate have a very different lattice which is mismatched from your crystal right from your like silicon for example then then you really have some kind of mismatch streak then this mismatch streak would really introduce a mismatch stress so this stress actually builds up right because when it becomes a thicker and thicker then you have a very large elastic energy penalty there then finally when it becomes thick enough so this elastic energy is so big so that would really right that would really break away this nice thin field and they form a lot of wavy structures or islands and those things yeah so this actually so-called the the 2D growth and follow by 3D growth yeah so this is also very important all right yeah okay.
那么对于外延生长，我们有二维生长，就像层层附着在衬底上，而且更倾向于彼此附着，实际上这被称为二维生长，是的，所以我们有这种，通常叫逐层生长。另一种方法实际上叫三维生长或岛状生长，是的，所以这里通常有个名字，叫mermer wagamo。所以实际上层并不是真的喜欢附着在衬底上，是的，那意味着你在这里形成岛，而不是一个非常平坦的板，你形成岛，是的，所以这非常容易理解，有时实际上你首先形成层，你有二维生长，然后后来你无法再维持这种二维生长，它就变成三维生长，这叫strong strong skin and crus tendons模式，通常我们叫SK模式。这种SK模式实际上是由应力产生的，因为通常你的衬底有一个非常不同的晶格，与你的晶体不匹配，比如硅，那么你就真的会有某种失配应变，这种失配应变就会引入失配应力，这种应力会积累起来，因为当它变得越来越厚，那里就有非常大的弹性能量惩罚，最后当它厚到一定程度，弹性能量大到真的会破坏这层良好的薄膜，形成大量波浪状结构或岛，诸如此类，所以这实际上叫二维生长随后三维生长，是的，这也非常重要。好的，是的，可以。

And then the next question is how are just low-dimensional semiconductor growth yeah so one thing actually is just that you can just take this low-dimensional also you can do this epitaxy yeah and also like the gas phase right or like NBE right or liquid phase epitaxy but also you can just do the nanocrystal phase yeah then let's take a look at certain NBE machine so this one actually is NBE machine yeah so those are just a source right you put some some some some some some atoms some molecules there yeah yeah
那么下一个问题是，低维半导体是怎么生长的呢。实际上有一点就是，你可以直接采用这种低维方式，也可以做这种外延生长，还有气相法对吧，或者说是NBE，还有液相外延，但也可以直接做纳米晶相。那我们来看一下某台NBE设备，这台实际上就是NBE机器。这些就是源，你把一些原子、一些分子放在那里。

and you also have some kind of thermal isolators there right and then this one is a screen actually that you try to really observe your growth from so this is just an electron diffraction right so this high energy electron diffraction ring yeah so this one is important so you can just see it in situ how you you your crystal is growing here right this NBE machine yeah you see it yeah and then this one actually is some kind of electron electron gun yeah yeah yeah shooting there so this shooting there actually just transport you to really collect the the spectroscope yeah this is not really about the crystal growth this is just you try to really monitor crystal growth right but your substances actually they're coming from those shutters yeah so those source actually coming from those shutters right then they deposit actually out the growth from yeah then this one actually is a beam try to really just monitoring this ion gauge yeah so you can just engage yeah and this.
而且那里还有一些热隔离器，对吧。然后这是一个屏幕，实际上你试图用它来观察你的生长过程。所以这只是电子衍射，对吧，就是高能电子衍射环，嗯。所以这个很重要，你可以原位观察你的晶体在这里是如何生长的，就是这台NBE设备，你看到了吧。然后这个实际上是某种电子枪，嗯，对，在那里发射。那束射线射过去其实是为了传输并收集光谱信号，嗯。这实际上不是关于晶体生长的，这只是你试图监测晶体生长的方式，对吧。但你的材料实际上来自那些挡板，对吧。那些源就是来自那些挡板，然后它们沉积出来，形成生长，嗯。然后这个是束流，用来监测离子规的，对吧，所以你可以进行控制，嗯。然后这个……

One also just give you like simple exchange some kind of mechanism like change change different samples right and this one is important a lot of pumps so while we have a lot of pumps here so.
另外一个就是可以给你简单的交换机制，比如更换不同的样品，对吧。然后这个很重要，有很多泵，所以我们这里有很多泵。

Want to really maintain a vacuum in this chamber yeah so so in the NBE actually this is a pretty nice vacuum there yeah so vacuum is nice in the way that you also have very few impurities from the atmospheres in the chamber right so this is also important this also makes the NBE super expensive right you have a lot of pumps like you you usually have a very high vacuum right and UHV right ultra high high vacuum yeah then one thing another thing also your growth velocity is very slow yeah usually this very low temperature you deposit all these source right so this is a low temperature yeah all right so this is called NBE right yeah so this is like a typical like photographs and this 35 NBE growth of this semiconductors yeah so you can see just a lot of just windows actually from the reserve and also this is those chamber here yeah so this is a a 26 NBE right 26 NBE right yeah generally there the structure they're very similar but their growth condition can be very different and another thing also that I will never you do the growth of a certain materials in one chamber then usually you don't really want to really mess up with some brand new elements in this new in this chamber so this could really create a huge pollution yeah so for example like if. And arsenic and other elements can be can can pollute can can be a very big pollution and to your crystal zinc oxide if you zinc oxide right so this is very very important okay.
就是想在这个腔室里维持真空对吧，所以在NBE里这其实是个非常好的真空环境，对吧，真空好在你可以避免腔室里大气带来的杂质，对吧，这也很重要，这也让NBE变得超级贵，对吧，你有很多泵，通常要有很高的真空，对吧，还有UHV，超高真空，然后另一件事是，你的生长速度非常慢，对吧，通常是在很低温度下沉积所有这些源材料，对吧，这是低温，对吧，好的，这就是所谓的NBE，对吧，这就是像是典型的照片，这个35 NBE生长的半导体，对吧，你可以看到很多窗口，实际上是从观察窗看的，还有这些是这里的腔室，对吧，这是一个26 NBE，26 NBE，对吧，一般来说它们的结构很相似，但生长条件可能非常不同，还有另一件事，我不会……你在一个腔室里生长某种材料，通常你不会真的想用这个腔室去弄一些全新的元素，因为这会造成巨大的污染，对吧，比如说如果……砷和其他元素可能会污染，可能会对你的晶体氧化锌造成很大的污染，如果是氧化锌的话，对吧，所以这非常非常重要，好的。

So let's just just give have a very brief review summary so for NBE growth actually the advantage is actually that we have ultra high vacuum and also ultra clean and also the precision at the so-called sub model layer level yeah how actually this is really like controlled by what by the by the electron diffraction right by the ring right you can control it very well you can do it in situ measurement or observation so you can grow control it very very well yeah so disadvantage this is super advantage so you only see usually you only see NBE in universities or national labs but you don't really see NBEs in factories yeah and also they're very slow so a few model layer per minute.
所以咱们就简单做个非常简短的回顾总结吧。对于NBE生长，优势其实是超高真空，还有超洁净，以及所谓的亚单层级别的精度。这实际上是由什么控制的呢？由电子衍射控制，对吧，通过那个环。你可以控制得非常好，能进行原位测量或观察，所以生长控制得非常非常好。缺点呢，这是超级优势，所以你通常只会在大学或国家实验室看到NBE，但在工厂里真的看不到NBE。而且它们非常慢，每分钟只有几个单层。

Model layer is what just one atom thing of the of the materials you do it for just one minute so this is a very very slow growth technique and also it can easily contaminate it and also not feasible for many compounds yeah so for for for for a lot of compounds you have to really have the proper source that you can grow NBE but this is not not possible for many compounds yeah and this one actually give you a examples of another structured semiconductors yeah so this is a quantum one yeah so this portion actually you have a gallium arsenide this portion actually is a gallium luthium arsenide another gallium arsenide here yeah so this format so-called a quantum one so this is very nice you can see very sharp interface right so that's sharp interface yeah but this one actually is a high resolution transmission electron micrograph TEM yeah yeah so in our department we also have this TEM facility and in our department of physics so if you you like you are also try to really schedule a visit there yeah so I think professor Li Qiu actually is in charge of those facilities yeah just a contemporary if you're interested probably in the GTA really schedule some of the visit for you so you can see this TEM facility and also this is this is very nice very beautiful yeah so usually when you see these things actually you will see what you will see a lot of laser dials yeah so they can grow very very sharply of this interface that they have a very nice like a quantum mechanical confinement and also excitation this is super nice all right yeah so don't worry about it it's a laser fix I don't really want to really just test you anything about laser and this one actually is my favorite the so-called OMVP organometallic vapor fixed test yeah so so here actually we show like for example this is a arsenic right this is super toxic this one arsenic or frosting another super toxic thing yeah just a very very tiny one we kill you for sure yeah
模型层就是那种材料的一个原子层的东西，你只做一分钟，所以这是一个非常非常慢的生长技术，而且它很容易被污染，并且对许多化合物来说也不可行，是啊，因为对于很多化合物，你必须要有合适的源材料才能生长NBE，但对很多化合物来说这是不可能的，是啊，然后这个实际上给你一个另一种结构化半导体的例子，是啊，所以这是一个量子阱，是啊，所以这部分实际上是砷化镓，这部分实际上是镓铝砷，这里又是另一个砷化镓，是啊，所以这种结构叫做量子阱，这非常好，你可以看到非常尖锐的界面，对吧，那就是尖锐的界面，是啊，但这个实际上是高分辨率透射电子显微镜图像，TEM，是啊，所以在我们系里我们也有这个TEM设备，在我们物理系里，所以如果你感兴趣的话，你也许真的可以试着安排一次参观，是啊，所以我想李秋教授负责这些设备，是啊，如果你感兴趣的话，也许在助教那里真的可以安排一次参观给你，这样你可以看看这个TEM设备，而且这真的是非常漂亮，是啊，所以通常当你看到这些东西时，你会看到很多激光二极管，是啊，所以他们可以生长出非常非常尖锐的这种界面，他们有非常好的量子力学限制，还有激发，这超级棒，好吧，是啊，所以别担心，这是一个激光设备，我真的不想测试你们关于激光的任何内容，然后这个实际上是我最喜欢的，所谓的OMVP，有机金属气相沉积，是啊，所以在这里我们展示，比如这是砷，这是超级毒的，这是砷，或者霜，另一个超级毒的东西，是啊，就非常非常小的一点就能让你毙命，肯定是的。

and and and this one actually is a garden with some kind of yeah yeah yeah so this is a carbon chain right yeah this garden is carbon chain so this this H2 the hydrogen actually is a. Yeah flow different sources and the carried by this carrier gas of hydrogen right then the flow actually to the growth from this chamber right so this is a heater right and then then they condense this crystal actually on top of this substrate yeah so this is like gallium arsenide you can change the gallium arsenide to gallium nitride or or gallium phosphide or indium nitride indium phosphide all those things right yeah so here this there's a there's a typical advantage of a chemical reaction here yeah so this thing actually is with a lot of carbon chain it's called a tremendous garden yeah so the yeah so the garden with three CH3 yeah so it's a then it reacts with arsenic yeah and then when they react react together then all this carbon chains they fly out all this hydrogen they also fly out right and they also have methane fly out there then what is condensed what is remain here actually the gallium arsenide now you can see this thing actually is no longer a vacuum growth right so this is a we do not really see a lot of pulse there's just a based on this structure you can easily see what this is super cheap right much cheaper than the NBE then then in industry much this this this device must be very important right so this is the the the typical just an equipment that you just grow all the lightning dials you are using right for your cell phones for your laptop all those backlights are just growing in this kind of things right all right yeah so this is a OMVP yeah so my TNE advisor street fellow so Gerard the street fellow actually was one of the pioneers of this approach so in the 70s actually he was an engineer at HP and later he went to university yeah so and he also grow this Indian Indian.
而且这个其实是个带有某种碳链的“花园”，对吧？对，这个花园就是碳链，所以这个H2，就是氢气，实际上是……对，不同源流，由氢这种载气携带，对吧？然后气流进入这个腔室进行生长，对吧？所以这是个加热器，然后晶体就在这个衬底上冷凝出来，对吧？所以这就像是砷化镓，你可以把砷化镓换成氮化镓，或者磷化镓，或者氮化铟、磷化铟，所有这些都可以，对吧？对，所以这里就有化学反应的典型优势，对吧？所以这个东西其实带了很多碳链，叫三甲基镓，对吧？就是带有三个CH3的镓，然后它和砷反应，对吧？当它们反应在一起时，所有这些碳链都飞走了，所有这些氢也飞走了，对吧，还会有甲烷飞出来。然后凝结的、留下来的，其实就是砷化镓。现在你可以看到，这个东西不再是真空生长了，对吧？所以我们看不到很多脉冲，就是基于这个结构，你很容易看出这非常便宜，比MBE便宜得多。然后在工业上，这个器件一定非常重要，对吧？所以这就是个典型的设备，你用的所有照明LED就是在这种设备里生长的，对吧？你手机、笔记本电脑的那些背光都是在这种设备里生长的，对吧？好的，对，所以这就是OMVPE。我的博士导师，Gerard，就是这位研究员，是这个方法的先驱之一。在70年代，他实际上是惠普的工程师，后来去了大学，对吧？而且他还生长了这种铟，铟……

Gallium phosphide at the time aluminum gallium phosphide at the time as this calculators lighting in bells of of display units at the time in the 70s yeah so he's very famous for for this OMVP growth yeah and this.
当时是磷化镓，当时是铝镓磷，作为当时七十年代贝尔实验室显示器件的计算器照明，是的，所以他因这种OMVP生长技术而非常出名，还有这个。

Is a Nakamura you've probably heard about this guy right some of you yeah yeah so so Shujin Nakamura yeah and he was one of the major inventors of lighting dials of blue lights right so in his blue light lighting dials he also taking this OMVP growth right so-called two flow OMVP growth. Notice this guy right TMG that is a tremendous garden right and also combining with ammonia and also with H2 as a carrier gas right yeah after this explanation now now you really see something right but his chamber actually is there's a vacuum pump so he still have a vacuum pump but that's that's not an ultra ultra high vacuum right yeah vacuum pump all right so this is a yeah and then also he has some kind of details when you take like two flow like subflow and also main flow right to grow better better qualities of gallium nitride so this is really his contribution yeah.
中村修二你们大概都听说过这个人吧，有些人知道对吧，所以就是中村修二，他是蓝光发光二极管的主要发明者之一，对吧。所以在他的蓝光发光二极管里，他也采用了这种OMVP生长技术，也就是所谓的两流OMVP生长。注意这个人，TMG，也就是三甲基镓，对吧，那是一种非常关键的原料，对吧。再加上氨气，还有H2作为载气，对吧。经过这番解释之后，现在你确实能看出点门道来了，对吧。但它的反应腔室里有一个真空泵，所以他确实还有真空泵，但那不是超高真空，对吧。嗯，真空泵，好的，所以就是这样，对吧。然后呢，他还有一些细节设计，比如说分成两路气流，子流和主流，对吧，用来长出更好质量的氮化镓。所以这真的是他的贡献，对吧。

So let's summarize this OMVP so OMVP actually this is a fast it can be scaled up for commercial productions right so nowadays actually this is a just a main approach actually in any factories fabricating lightning dials it can also work at a relative high pressure and also capable of almost monolayer precision and this advantage so it requires a starting chemicals so precursors and to be in the gas form and also the byproduct also be in the gas form and to be to be removed yeah so this is a little bit tricky activities and also some of these precursors can be highly toxic and also explosive metal.
好，我们来总结一下OMVP。OMVP实际上是一种快速的技术，可以规模化用于商业生产，对吧？所以如今实际上这是一种主要方法，在所有制造发光二极管的工厂里都是如此。它还能在相对较高的压力下工作，并且能够达到几乎单原子层的精度。这个优势在于，它需要起始化学品，也就是前驱体，以气体形式存在，同时副产物也必须是气体形式，才能被移除，是吧？所以这在实际操作中有点棘手，而且其中一些前驱体可能具有高毒性，还有爆炸性的金属。

Organic compounds yeah those are dangerous yeah and also there are some common contaminants and C and H and you know why right because we have like a this TMG right TMG this right this this this
有机化合物，对，那些很危险，对，还有一些常见的污染物，比如碳和氢，你们知道为什么吧，因为我们有像这个TMG，对吧，就是这个TMG，这个这个这个

Yeah C and H right here okay okay.
对，碳和氢，对吧。好的好的。

Then let me check time shall we take a break yeah yeah let's take a break yeah.
那我来看看时间，我们要不要休息一下？嗯，我们休息一下吧。

— 由 LecSync 生成